Welcome to the Arcade of Life. Here you will find a number of games modeled after classic arcade games, but based on cellular automata like Conway's Game of Life.

First, let's try Missile Defender. The idea here is pretty simple. The enemy spawns missiles that attack your bases, and you have to protect your bases. You can do this by drawing cells of life like this. Your cells of life grow and evolve according to the rules of the cellular automata, just like the enemy cells do. Now, in order to get this back base, we draw a long line. And this evolves into kind of a square, allowing us to reach those back areas. Our life is active in most of the territory, so it looks like we're going to win, but let's speed this up. And we won.

Now I'm going to restart this to take a closer look at what's going on. The game of life uses cellular automata, so here I've paused the game and you can see the enemy gliders approaching us. In the game of life, cells are activated or deactivated based on how many neighbors they have, so it's a very specific set of rules that the cells obey. And both your cells and the enemy cells obey these rules. So if I respond to this by drawing a line to defend myself, we will step along — we will advance time a single time step at a time — and see what happens. The enemy gliders will go through a couple of different configurations as they move. They're not so much moving as they are a traveling wave, or a traveling pattern. Likewise, our pattern is acting much like a traveling wave too, creating ripples and expanding outward, finally crashing into the enemy gliders. So in the game of life, you have many, many different patterns, and when they meet, it creates interesting destruction mechanics.

Now let's try Space Invaders. Space Invaders uses spaceships being spawned, similar to the gliders being spawned in Missile Defender. And this time we have the glider pattern in our pattern drawing tool, so we can spawn gliders that travel upward and then annihilate the descending enemy spaceships. It's a game that looks pretty much like Space Invaders, but it is completely based off of the rules of cellular automata.

You've probably noticed that if there are gliders and spaceships, what else are there? Let's go back to the main menu and check out the library, which features a pattern zoo. We'll open the pattern zoo, and here we can see all of the known single-life patterns that are available on the Life Wiki dataset. These are all available with dynamic viewing, and you can even edit them to make your own custom patterns. You can also use the patterns to place patterns in game, as we'll show you later.

Next, let's take a look at the level designer. In the level designer, we have a number of different drawing tools, and for each drawing tool we can paint several different types of ink. There is Defense and Enemy ink, which are identical to what you spawn in game. Then there's Barrier and Fire ink, which are static — they do not ever change in game. Barrier is static and acts as an unset pixel, so it can isolate areas of life. And Fire acts as a set pixel, which leads to some more interesting mechanics we'll talk about in a few minutes. Finally, we have the erasing type, which is exactly what it sounds like.

So let's start by drawing a very simple demo level. We're going to use the fill tool, and we are going to fill with random 25%. So we will fill the friendly drawing area with random 25% fill, and we will give it a single city. Cities are what you have to defend as the player during the game. We also have bases and spawners. Bases spawn enemy patterns and have special rules around scoring and persistence. Let's pick one from the zoo — this one looks fun. I'll place it right here. And a spawner spawns multiple patterns whenever the area for spawning is clear. So let's define a spawner and spawn something fun. How about this spaceship? We rotate it by pressing R to make sure it travels downward, and we'll place it right here. Now we have to give the game a level name, and let's save and play. This isn't meant to be a functional game — it gives you a sense of the level designer mechanics.

Let's exit back to the main menu and try some of the games from the library. The first one is great for demonstrating the value of defense tiles. This has enemy Gosper glider guns defended by a conduit of barrier tiles. This provides an interesting mechanic where, in order to win, you have to fight upstream against a moving stream of gliders, until finally you are able to disrupt them. Then we rotate by right-clicking our pattern select spawner, and we can shoot gliders up the other conduit until we disable it. We can speed up the game for a moment, and we've won.

Next, from the library, let's pick Fire Line. Fire Line is a good level to demonstrate the mechanics of fire tiles. This is largely a level that you can sit and watch if you want, although you can certainly participate and experiment. This has an array of Gosper glider guns — both enemy and friendly — both shooting at a line of fire tiles in the middle. The glider guns will activate the fire tiles along the center line.

Now we are going to view one more type of game. We'll go to the library and select Tower Defense Simulator. This is a special game mode where you are assigned barrier and fire ink, and you are able to place them at the beginning. So we have an enemy Gosper glider gun and a friendly one, both pointing at each other. We want to paint some barrier tiles roughly where we think the enemy glider gun is going to shoot us in order to defend ourselves. And additionally, we'll do some creative painting with our fire tiles. Let's fill a random region of space with fire tiles, nice and safely away from our glider gun — because remember, a Gosper glider gun is not a city; it will be easily disrupted by friendly fire. And for fun, I'm going to draw some barrier line there as well. That looks good. Let's see what happens.

An interesting thing about fire tiles is that sometimes you've got to kind of strike a match. There you go. So we've manually activated the fire tiles, and our defenses seem to be holding, so we'll speed this up and see if there's a resolution. There we go — victory! So the tower defense game gives it kind of more of a puzzle feel to it, which can also be fun.

Finally, we have Help. Over here in the Help tab, we have a comprehensive guide on game mechanics, controls, and how to play. We also have a console hacking guide where you can use JavaScript and the browser dev tools to do all kinds of playing with the game. And I also invite you to view us on GitHub — I'd love it if you could leave me a star. Other than that, I hope you enjoy this game. Thank you very much. Bye.